# An Introduction to Generalized Algebraic Datatypes

## Context

- Date: 11.05.2026
- Duration: 1h30
- University: HES-SO (Lausanne campus)
- Level: Master
- Course: Advanced Programming Paradigms
- Instructor: Jean-Paul Calbimonte

## Slides

```
cd slides
# Using the nix devshell
slides-server
# Then navigate to the main page (http://localhost:8080)
```

Controls:
- `→`: next slide.
- `←`: previous slide.

A [PDF](slides.pdf) can be generated by printing the webpage to PDF from your
browser (usually `ctrl + p`).

Pacing:
- `Algebraic Datatypes`: ~40min
- `An Introduction to Generalized Algebraic Datatypes`: ~20min
- `A Case Study on Generalized Algebraic Datatypes`: ~25min

## Code

- [`Tree`](code/Tree.scala) (slide 6) was written live.
- [`Bits`](code/Bits.scala) (slide 47): the `bits` function was already there and was
  studied. After the companion [`PackedArray`](code/PackedArray.scala)
  file was briefly showed, the `packedBits` function was added live by mutating
  the original code.
- [`SmartArray`](code/SmartArray.scala) (slide 50) was written live.
- [`RBTree`](code/RBTree.scala) (slide 63) was written live.
- [`TreeBench`](code/TreeBench.scala) was not shown in class.
  It implements the benchmarks used in the lecture (slide 30)
  and can run using
  ```
  scala --jmh .
  ```

(Most) comments were added after the lecture.

## Comments

- The benchmarks (slide 30) are of course to be taken with a grain of salt, as
  they are 1) microbenchmarks 2) only a single function (`map`) is being tested.
  In particular, other benchmarks I conducted while preparing the lecture gave
  wildly different results in terms of the magnitude of the performance gap. The
  ranking however seemed fairly consistend among my benchmarks: `OOP` is the
  slowest, `Type Test` is usually almost as fast (and sometimes barely faster)
  than `ADT`.
- The red-black tree example was done iteratively, starting from a tree without
  invariants (nor colors), and adding the invariants one by one, in order.
- Playing with the example red-black tree is what allows GADTs to shine:
  attempting to color a node red, while (one of) its children is itself red
  gives a type error, attempting to declare a child red results in an error
  if said child is a leaf, etc.
- Note that invariant (1) of the red-black trees is not fully enforced.
  the type parameter `C`, which represents the color of the node, could by
  any type: the node could be "colored `Int`".
  - The addition of Invariant 4 does however ensure that only `Red` and `Black`
    can be used as colors.
  - We could _almost_ enforce it fully by adding a type bound: `C <: Color`.
    This does however require adding the bound pervasively, and still allows
    nodes to be "colored `Color`".